---
layout: post
title: uhttpd - micro HTTP server
subtitle: A tiny HTTP server for static files
gh-repo: bigmikes/uhttpd
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [http, go, server]
comments: false
---

What's [_uhttp_](https://github.com/bigmikes/uhttpd)? It's an HTTP server for static files. I created this tool to render many HTML documentation files from a remote virtual machine. For this task, I didn't feel like downloading a huge production-ready HTTP server and learn how to configure it properly. I am a software engineer after all, I enjoy writing code. In fact, this was the perfect excuse to use my preferred coding language (you guessed it, Go) and learn something new. 

This project is just ~150 lines of code, that's why I named it _tiny_ server. It is so small thanks to the Go's HTTP standard library, which is really high level and already provides most of the code necessary to implement an HTTP server. 

Uhttpd consists of two main components: *server* and *main*. The former implements the actual HTTP server and hides the complexity of interacting with the Go's HTTP library to the main module. The latter makes use of the server component and deals with the wiring to actually start the server.

## HTTP server

I find it useful to wrap standard library's data structures. It helps with confining the library-specific code in one place, while the rest of my code can use the wrapper data structure that exports only what really matters to my application. Also, it improves code modularity, since if I wanted to change one value concerning the HTTP server, I wouldn't need to look around for all its uses in the code base. Of course, as the project becomes bigger with more requirements for the server package, it could become harder to still provide simple interface from a single package. Software engineering is a matter of trade-offs.

So, first off we need to store the `http.Server` handle inside our custom data structure, as shown below. The `http.Server` data structure contains all the parameters for running the HTTP server. We will see later a few key parameters we need. 

```Go
// SimpleServer represents one instance of
// HTTP/HTTPS file server
type SimpleServer struct {
	srv *http.Server
}
```

One may ask why a pointer to `http.Server` instead of its value. That's a very good question. Whether using the pointer or the value semantics is an essential decision, also because it might impact Garbage Collector's performance. I would suggest [Bill's article](https://www.ardanlabs.com/blog/2017/06/design-philosophy-on-data-and-semantics.html) to get a better understanding of the differences between pointer and value semantics. In my specific case, I used a pointer because all methods we will need to call on `http.Server` use the pointer semantics.

Now, we can write a function that takes a few arguments and returns our `SimpleServer` structure initialized and ready to start the HTTP server. What parameters do we need? Obviously we need the IP `address`, and the `port` behind the server must listen on. Then, since this is an HTTP server for static files, we also want to know the `path` to the folder where the static files to serve are present.

```Go
// NewSimpleServer creates the handle for a
// new simple server listening on <address> and <port>
// serving the directory pointed by <path>
func NewSimpleServer(address, port, path string) SimpleServer {
	//Create server with custom values
	s := http.Server{
		Addr:              fmt.Sprintf("%v:%v", address, port),
		ReadTimeout:       5 * time.Second,
		WriteTimeout:      10 * time.Second,
	}

	//Register handle to serve files
	http.Handle("/", http.FileServer(http.Dir(path)))

	log.Println("Created server on path", path, "under", s.Addr, "address")
	return SimpleServer{&s}
}
```

Let's see one by one the fields we set in `http.Server`:

* `Addr`: identifies the IP address and port to listen on. The address is expected in the following form: _IP:port_;
* `ReadTimeout`: an HTTP request consists of headers and a body. This timeout limits the time spent to read the entire request (headers and body);
* `WriteTimeout`: covers the time from the reception of the request until the response is completely written;

Basically, what we are saying with the above configuration is that every request should be received in at most 5 seconds. But in any case a request must be served with respective response within 10 seconds. Any connection that does not meet these two upper limits is closed by the server. 

Timeouts are crucial when developing a server application: not every network connection behaves properly, when one hangs you want a timeout to release your server resources. Generally speaking, timeouts avoid slow clients to affect the overall performance of your server. [This article](https://blog.cloudflare.com/the-complete-guide-to-golang-net-http-timeouts/) clarifies perfectly the purposes of Go http package's timeouts.

Finally, we call `http.Handle` to register the `http.FileServer` handler. This handler is registered into the global default request multiplexer `http.DefaultServeMux`, which is picked up by our `http.Server` object by default. An HTTP handler is basically a variable that implements the callback function to serve HTTP requests. In this case, `http.FileServer` serves HTTP requests with the content of file system rooted at `path`. 

Now, the server handle is ready to start listening and accepting new requests. We just need to start it with `ListenAndServe` method:

```Go
// StartHTTPServer starts the HTTP server.
// It blocks until Shutdown is called or
// an error is returned
func (s SimpleServer) StartHTTPServer() {
	//Start the HTTP server
	log.Println("uHTTP (unsecured) server listening")
	err := s.srv.ListenAndServe()
	if err != http.ErrServerClosed {
		log.Fatal("Server unexpectedly crashed:", err)
	}
}
```

`ListenAndServe` method starts the actual HTTP server. Internally, it accepts new TCP connections on the address and port indicated by `Addr` field. When a new HTTP request comes in, `ListenAndServe` spawns a fresh goroutine to serve it. However, new connections are accepted inside the same goroutine of caller function. In practice, this means that `ListenAndServe` is a blocking function and it returns only when the server stopped.

If you want to start an HTTPS server rather than a normal unsecure HTTP one, you can simply call `ListenAndServeTLS`. That works pretty much the same as its counterpart, adding two additional parameters: paths of certificate and private key files. `ListenAndServeTLS` uses the private key and certificate to support TLS connections and provide that nice green lock at the right of the URL bar in your browser. 

As you know, the certificate must be signed by a CA that is trusted by your browser. But typically you don't have an actual valid certificate for local development. Fortunately, there is a tool to generate locally-trusted certificates: [mkcert](https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert).

```Go
// StartHTTPSServer starts the HTTPS server
// using certificate and private key.
// It blocks until Shutdown is called or
// an error is returned
func (s SimpleServer) StartHTTPSServer(certFile, keyFile string) {
	//Start the HTTPS server
	log.Println("uHTTP (secure) server listening")
	err := s.srv.ListenAndServeTLS(certFile, keyFile)
	if err != http.ErrServerClosed {
		log.Fatal("Server unexpectedly crashed:", err)
	}
}
```

Last thing we need to take care of is termination of the server. It is a good practice to always think about the entire life cycle of your program, so you also want to address the shutting down phase.

In order to teardown both HTTP and HTTPS servers, there are two methods you can use: `Shutdown` and `Close`. The former attempts a graceful termination without closing active connections. The latter instead immediately closes all the ongoing connections and stops the server. `Shutdown` waits for all connections to go _idle_ and then finalizes the server. Therefore, it might wait indefinitely. This is why here we use both methods to make sure that our server eventually terminates. 

In fact, we first create a `context.Context` with timeout of 5 seconds, then we call `Shutdown` using this context. If `Shutdown` makes it within 5 seconds and without errors, we are done and we can just return. Otherwise, we also call the `Close` method, in order to make sure that pending connections get closed. 

```Go
// Shutdown terminates the server instance by calling
// http.Shutdown. In case of errors, it immediately closes
// the server through http.Close
func (s SimpleServer) Shutdown() {
	ctx, cancel := context.WithTimeout(context.Background(), 5*time.Second)
	defer cancel() //Don't forget to call it anyway. It releases the context's resources
	err := s.srv.Shutdown(ctx)
	if err != nil {
		log.Println("Shutdown failed, trying to close the server...", err)
		err := s.srv.Close()
		log.Fatalln("Close failed, just exiting...", err)
	}
	log.Println("Server shutdown")
}
```

## Main file

At this point we just have to use the `SimpleServer` in the main file. But first, since we are writing a utility command-line tool, we need to know some parameters first:

```Go
import "flag"

var (
	port   = flag.String("l", "8080", "Listen port")
	addr   = flag.String("a", "localhost", "Listen IP address")
	cert   = flag.String("c", "", "Certificate file")
	prvKey = flag.String("p", "", "Private key file")
)
```

`flag` package is pretty cool and it is also part of Go's standard library. If you want to define a flag for your program, all you need to do is to define a global variable using the appropriate type from the flag package. For instance, if you need an integer flag, you just have to say: 

```Go
intFlag = flag.Int("int-flag-name", default-value, "optional help message)"
``` 

For our HTTP server, we basically need to know from user the IP address and port to listen on, the paths pointing to the private key and its certificate. Therefore, all of them can be simply string types. These result in the executable being invoked like the following: 

```
uhttp -a 127.0.0.1 -l 7070 -c cert.pem -p priv.key ...
```

As first thing in the main function, we call the `flag.Parse` API, that automatically reads all the parameters and assigns each one of them to the respective global variable. Then, we check if user also specified an optional argument, which is the path to the root of file system to serve. `flag.NArg` function returns the total number of arguments. If it is exactly equal to 1, then we got the argument we wanted in the first position and we read it through `flag.Arg(0)`. Otherwise, the default behavior is to use the working directory where the command was invoked from. The working directory is simply provided by `os.Getwd` API. 

```Go
func main() {
	flag.Parse()

	var rootPath string
	switch flag.NArg() {
	case 1:
		rootPath = flag.Arg(0)
	default:
		dir, err := os.Getwd()
		if err != nil {
			log.Fatal(err)
		}
		rootPath = dir
	}

	//Create new server
	s := NewSimpleServer(*addr, *port, rootPath)

	//Register function that calls s.Shutdown once
	//the program receives interrupt signal
	wg := registerCleanupFunction(s)

	//Check if user wants an HTTP or HTTPS server and start
	if *cert != "" || *prvKey != "" {
		s.StartHTTPSServer(*cert, *prvKey)
	} else {
		s.StartHTTPServer()
	}
	//Wait for cleanup function to finish
	wg.Wait()
	log.Println("Exited")
}
```

At this point we should have all the input data from user that we need. So, we can create the server handle by calling `NewSimpleServer` and passing the _values_ of the input parameters by dereferencing them. That's right, functions like `flag.String` and `flag.Int` define pointers, not values.  

As mentioned earlier, starting the server is a blocking operation, hence we have to first register the cleanup function before calling `StartHTTPServer` or `StartHTTPSServer` methods. `registerCleanupFunction` takes care of spawning an additional goroutine that waits for an interrupt signal from the OS. As soon as this signal is received through the `sigint` channel, the goroutine immediately calls the `Shutdown` method on the server handle. `registerCleanupFunction` also returns a `sync.WaitGroup` in order to make the caller wait for the additional goroutine to exit.

```Go
func registerCleanupFunction(s SimpleServer) *sync.WaitGroup {
	wg := new(sync.WaitGroup)
	go func() {
		wg.Add(1)
		defer wg.Done()
		//Register handler for interrupt signal
		sigint := make(chan os.Signal, 1)
		signal.Notify(sigint, os.Interrupt)
		//Wait for interr signal
		<-sigint

		// We received an interrupt signal, shut down.
		s.Shutdown()
	}()
	return wg
}
```

Lastly, we can start the server by calling the appropriate start function, depending on whether the certificate and private key files got indicated by user or not. 

And that's pretty much it. This does not want to be a production-ready HTTP server, even if it might not be too far from being so, but it is more like a helper tool when you need to serve static files for internal development purposes. Very often, auto-generated documentation is basically a collection of static HTML files. Also, most of the times development happens inside a remote virtual machine. This tool can be used to display the doc in your local browser from the remote VM. 

Complete code for this can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/bigmikes/uhttpd).