---
layout: post
title: ED25519 signature in Go
subtitle: Sign and verify a document with the ED25519 algorithm
gh-repo: bigmikes/ed25519signature
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [go, signature, security, ED25519]
comments: false
---

Here we will not talk about the choice between ED25519 signature algorithm and the classic RSA or DSA. There are a number of reasons why ED25519 might be a good choice. If you want to know more, [this article](https://blog.peterruppel.de/ed25519-for-ssh/) could be a good starting point. Instead, we will see how to practically use the Go ED25519 library .

## How to generate a private and public keys pair

Go's ED25519 library provides a simple API to generate both private and public keys. `ed25519.GenerateKey` needs a source of entropy to generate the keys. This source is `crypto/rand.Reader` typically, which is a global variable of a cryptographically secure random number generator.

```Go

pubKey, privKey, err := ed25519.GenerateKey(rand.Reader)
if err != nil {
   log.Fatal(err)
}

```

Now keys are ready to be used for signature, but what you probably want to do first is to store the keys in a couple of PEM files and use them later. Keys are just raw bytes in a slice (i.e. `[]byte`), so they need to be serialized first and only then be saved into files.

Go's `crypto/x509` provides a vast API to deal with different formats of keys and certificates. Here, we make use of `x509.MarshalPKIXPublicKey` to marshal the public key. After that, the serialized public key can be encoded into the file using the PEM format. The package `encoding/pem` offers a PEM encored/decoder: `pem.Encode` takes the output file and one PEM block to write. In our case, the PEM block is just one and contains the public key with type "PUBLIC KEY". Finally, the file is closed and content is flushed to file system. 

```Go
//Create file and write public key
pubOut, err := os.OpenFile(public, os.O_WRONLY|os.O_CREATE|os.O_TRUNC, 0600)
if err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Failed to create %s file: %s", private, err)
}
pubBytes, err := x509.MarshalPKIXPublicKey(pubKey)
if err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Unable to marshal public key: %v", err)
}
//Encode public key using PEM format
if err := pem.Encode(pubOut, &pem.Block{
   Type:  "PUBLIC KEY",
   Bytes: pubBytes,
}); err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Failed to write data to %s file: %s", public, err)
}
if err := pubOut.Close(); err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Error closing %s file: %s", public, err)
}
```

Writing the private key to file is pretty similar to what we have just seen for the public key. We again need to open a file, serialize the private key and then encode it into the file. The only things that change are the marshaller function, which is `x509.MarshalPKCS8PrivateKey` and the PEM block's type, which is "PRIVATE KEY".

```Go
//Create file and write private key
keyOut, err := os.OpenFile(private, os.O_WRONLY|os.O_CREATE|os.O_TRUNC, 0600)
if err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Failed to create %s file: %s", private, err)
}
privBytes, err := x509.MarshalPKCS8PrivateKey(privKey)
if err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Unable to marshal private key: %v", err)
}
if err := pem.Encode(keyOut, &pem.Block{
   Type:  "PRIVATE KEY",
   Bytes: privBytes,
}); err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Failed to write data to %s file: %s", private, err)
}
if err := keyOut.Close(); err != nil {
   log.Fatalf("Error closing %s file: %s", private, err)
}
```

Putting all the pieces together, we obtain a single function that generates both private and public keys and store them into separate files. Complete code for this section can be found [here](https://github.com/bigmikes/ed25519signature/blob/master/generate.go).

This is just an example to get an overview of Go's API. But in practice, you want to protect the private key with a password and the public key should be a certificate from a trusted CA. Go's `crypto/x509` package provides API to file a certificate request, but that's a story for another day.

## How to sign a file

Now we got our keys pair. It is time to sign something and verify the signature. As an example, we are going to sign a file, but anything that can be serialized into a sequence of bytes can be signed.

We first need to read the private key from the PEM file. Reading and decoding a PEM file is a common operation we would need also for the public key, so it is worth having a utility function. In a nutshell, `decodePEMFile` reads the entire PEM file into a local buffer and decodes it by calling `pem.Decode`. The final result is a slice of bytes containing the payload, which in our case could either be the private or the public key.

```Go
//decodePEMFile reads and decodes generic PEM files.
func decodePEMFile(filePath string) ([]byte, error) {
   f, err := os.Open(filePath)
   if err != nil {
       return nil, err
   }
   defer f.Close()
   buf, err := ioutil.ReadAll(f)
   if err != nil {
       return nil, err
   }
   p, _ := pem.Decode(buf)
   if p == nil {
       return nil, fmt.Errorf("no pem block found")
   }
   return p.Bytes, nil
}
```

Disclaimer: for the sake of simplicity, here we are assuming that the private key is not encrypted, i.e. it is not protected by a passphrase.

Now we have the raw key in a buffer, but we cannot use it right away to sign with ED25519 algorithm yet. The raw key must be unmarshaled and parsed into the runtime representation of `ed25519.PrivateKey` type. This step is implemented by Go's API `x509.ParsePKCS8PrivateKey`, which supports different types of keys, therefore it returns the private key as a generic `interface{}` and the caller has to type-assert. We are only interested in ED25519 type of private key, so we return an error if the interface's concrete type is not `ed25519.PrivateKey`.

```Go
//PrivateKey is ed25519.PrivateKey.
type PrivateKey ed25519.PrivateKey

//GetPrivateKey reads the private key from input file and
//returns the initialized PrivateKey.
func GetPrivateKey(privateKey string) (PrivateKey, error) {
   p, _ := decodePEMFile(privateKey)
   key, err := x509.ParsePKCS8PrivateKey(p)
   if err != nil {
       return nil, err
   }
   edKey, ok := key.(ed25519.PrivateKey)
   if !ok {
       return nil, fmt.Errorf("key is not ed25519 key")
   }
   return PrivateKey(edKey), nil
}
```

Finally, this leads us to actually sign the document. Having defined our own type for the private key, we can implement a `Sign` method on it. The logic of this method is very simple: all it needs to do is to load the document in memory through `os.Open` and `ioutil.ReadAll` and ultimately sign it by calling `ed25519.Sign` with private key `p`. The returned signature is a raw slice of bytes, which should be encoded in hexadecimal string to be displayed.

```Go
//Sign reads the input file and computes the ED25519 signature
//using the private key.
func (p PrivateKey) Sign(path string) (string, error) {
   f, err := os.Open(path)
   if err != nil {
       return "", err
   }
   defer f.Close()
   buf, err := ioutil.ReadAll(f)
   if err != nil {
       return "", err
   }
   signature := ed25519.Sign(ed25519.PrivateKey(p), buf)
   return hex.EncodeToString(signature), nil
}
```

### Performance and security considerations

RSA, DSA and ECDSA typically require the caller to hash the input payload before actually signing it. This is needed especially when signing large messages, given that the signing operation is complex and might slow down your application. Instead, the operation can be completed quickly by signing only the hash digest, which is a smaller and fixed length sequence of bytes. However, ED25519 is different, since it already hashes the message as part of its algorithm. It does so in such a way that the signature is resistant to forgery attacks, even in the case of the hash function (i.e. SHA512) becoming insecure in the future. Therefore, if user prehashes the message before signing it with ED25519, it basically makes a forgery attack feasible again if the attacker can efficiently find a collision for the hash function being used. These [answers](https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/27277/more-efficient-and-just-as-secure-to-sign-message-hash-using-ed25519) provide more details about why this happens.

The message cannot be hashed, so how can you sign large messages? As [RFC8032](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032#section-8.7) says, you should not. Since the entire message must be buffered in order to verify the signature, it is always a good security practice to limit the amount of unverified data your program processes. Therefore, this is not a real problem given that signing is considered unsafe anyway.

To summarize, ED25519 is meant for small to medium size messages which should not prehashed before the signature.

## How to verify the signature

We got a signature to verify, along which we also received the respective message and the (presumed) signer's public key. The first thing to do is to load the public key from the PEM file by calling our utility function `decodePEMFile` we wrote before, and parse the raw content with `x509.ParsePKIXPublicKey`. Similarly to the private key, `x509.ParsePKIXPublicKey` supports different types of public key, hence we have to type-assert for concrete type `ed25519.PublicKey`.

```Go
//PublicKey is ed25519.PublicKey
type PublicKey ed25519.PublicKey

//returns the initialized PublicKey.
func GetPublicKey(publicKey string) (PublicKey, error) {
   p, _ := decodePEMFile(publicKey)
   key, err := x509.ParsePKIXPublicKey(p)
   if err != nil {
       return nil, err
   }
   edKey, ok := key.(ed25519.PublicKey)
   if !ok {
       return nil, fmt.Errorf("key is not ed25519 key")
   }
   return PublicKey(edKey), nil
}
```

Following the same approach of private key and `Sign` method, we can implement a `Verify` method on the local type `PublicKey`. This method takes the file and the signature string and returns whether it is a valid signature or not. Here we make the assumption that the input signature is encoded in hexadecimal. Thus, the method first loads the file in a slice of bytes through `os.Open` and `ioutil.ReadAll`. Then, it decodes the signature string and uses the resulting raw signature bytes to call `ed25519.Verify`. This API simply returns a boolean value: if `true`, the signature is valid, `false` otherwise.

```Go
//Verify checks that input signature is valid. That is, if
//input file was signed by private key corresponding to input
//public key.
func (p PublicKey) Verify(file, signature string) (bool, error) {
   f, err := os.Open(file)
   if err != nil {
       return false, err
   }
   defer f.Close()
   buf, err := ioutil.ReadAll(f)
   if err != nil {
       return false, err
   }
   byteSign, err := hex.DecodeString(signature)
   if err != nil {
       return false, err
   }
   ok := ed25519.Verify(ed25519.PublicKey(p), buf, byteSign)
   return ok, nil
}
```

And that's pretty much it. This is how you use the Go's `crypto` package to sign a document using ED25519 algorithm. Complete code with main file and usage example can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/bigmikes/ed25519signature).